# Earthquake Data Visualization: Project Overview


## Objective 
1. Read the survey data file provided (Superheroes.csv found in the files section of our course page) and store the information in a Python data structure
2. Ask the user which of the five methods described below they want to use to select a winner (the user input can be a number, a letter, a word, etc.)
3. Run an implementation of the chosen voting system and select a winner or declare a draw
4. Inform the user of the results, including total votes and winner

## Background
In this personal project, I studied the computational aspects of different voting methods. The prevalent philosophy about voting in the United States (and in the Western world in general) is the one person, one vote principle. Under this system, every voter casts a ballot supporting their preferred candidate, and the candidate with the most votes wins. This method is known as plurality voting. While it may seem like a common-sense approach, it is the source of much unfairness in election results. The most common problem with plurality voting is the phenomenon of vote splitting, in which multiple candidates run on similar platforms and each gets a share of (thereby "splitting") the same electorate. When this happens, a candidate disliked by the majority of the population can still win an election simply because the vote against them is split.
In the US, the most familiar form of vote splitting is the spoiler effect, in which a third candidate draws a significant share of the votes from either the Democrat or the Republican that would have otherwise won. The 1992 victory of Bill Clinton over George H.W. Bush was the result of (Republican) vote splitting by the spoiler candidate Ross Perot. The 2000 victory of George W. Bush over Al Gore was the result of (Democrat) vote splitting by spoiler candidate Ralph Nader.

Vote splitting can be effectively prevented by changing the voting method. There are multiple approaches to this end, each with its own pros and cons. Many of them rely on the use of ranked ballots. In this kind of ballot, a voter does not have to mark their one preferred candidate, but instead can define a ranking of several candidates from most to least preferred. Once voting is conducted in this way, there are different computational approaches to determine which candidate wins. For an in-depth discussion of vote splitting and the different methods to address it, you can review the book "Gaming the vote: why elections aren't fair (and what we can do about it)" by William Poundstone.

The CSV file used is a questionnaire collected. The voting methods for this project are:

### Plurality voting
This is the conventional one person, one vote method we use today in most elections. In this case, the winner of the election is the candidate that gets the most votes. To implement this method using our data, you need to count only the top-ranked superhero for each survey entry (the one with a ranking of 1) and add up the totals for every survey entry. The superhero with the most top ranks wins.

### Borda voting
This method was developed by 18th century mathematician Jean-Charles de Borda and is used today to decide the MLB most valuable player of the year and the ranking of the NCAA college teams. In this method, the voter ranks each candidate numerically and the winner is decided by adding points given to each candidate according to their ranking. To implement this method using our data, you need to give points to each candidate in reverse proportion to their ranking based on the total number of options. This means a ranking of 1 gives that candidate 12 points. A ranking of 2 gives 11 points and so on. If a candidate is not ranked, they get zero points.  The superhero with the most points wins.

### Condorcet voting
This method was developed by the Marquis of Condorcet, Marie Jean Antoine Nicolas de Caritat. Condorcet was an 18th century French philosopher and mathematician and a rival of Borda. Today, Condorcet voting is used by the Wikimedia foundation and the Linux community for most internal elections. In Condorcet voting, the winner is decided by determining the candidate that would beat every other candidate in a hypothetical head-to head match. To implement this method using our data, you will need to use the rankings given in the survey to determine the winner by considering every possible pair of superheroes. For example, if Batman is paired against Superman you would have to count both the number of people who have ranked Batman better (that is, with a lower number) than Superman, and the number who have ranked Superman better than Batman. If Batman is preferred by more people then he is the winner of that pairing. You must repeat this procedure for every possible pairing. If one superhero beats every other one in these pairings then they are the Condorcet winner. If there is no clear winner, the Condorcet method ends up in a draw.

### Instant-runoff (IRV) voting
This method was developed by Boston architect William Robert Ware at the end of the 19th century. It is based on the proportional representation methods used historically in the English parliament and in its current form (under various names, but normally called ranked-choice voting in the US) is used at different levels of government in the UK, Canada, and Australia. The US state of Maine started using it for their general elections in 2016. It is used today for local elections (e.g. for mayor) in the Bay Area. In IRV voting, multiple rounds of vote counting are done in which only the top-ranked candidates participate. If no candidate receives a majority of the top ranks, the candidate that was ranked at the top the least amount of times is eliminated from the race, and the votes that had gone to that candidate go to the second choice the voters gave in each case. After this redistribution, the top-ranked totals are calculated again. If no candidate has the majority of top rank votes, the elimination and redistribution process is repeated with the candidate with the least amount of top rank votes and the totals are calculated again. This process is repeated until a winner emerges. To implement this method using our data, you need to count every ranking submitted and do the multiple rounds of elimination until there is one candidate with more than 50% of top rank votes.

### Approval voting
This method was developed by Cornell University mathematician Robert J. Weber in the 1970s. Today it is relatively uncommon outside of professional organizations, but the United Nations uses it to elect its Secretary General. In approval voting, voters simply give a binary vote (approve or disapprove, thumbs up or down, like or dislike) for as many candidates as they want. The winner is whichever candidate gets the most positive votes. To implement this method using our data, you must find the average ranking for each survey entry. Any ranking below the average (remember, a ranking of 1 is the best) would count as an approval; anything above would be a disapproval. For example, if a survey entry ranks four superheroes (rankings would be 1-4, and the average would be 2.5) the rankings 1 and 2 would be approvals while 3 and 4 would be disapproval. If you have an entry with five superheroes ranked (1-5, average 3) rankings 1 and 2 would be approvals, while rankings 4 and 5 would be disapproval.  Ranking 3 would not count at all.  After doing this operation for every survey entry, you count the total number of approvals, and the candidate with the highest number wins.
